**pdp**

1

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY

APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1076 OF 2008

Adnan Bilal Mulla
Aged 29 yrs. Occ: Business
Resident of Village Borivali,
Post: Padgha, Taluka – Bhiwandi,
Dist. Thane (Presently in judicial
custody at Thane Central Prison, Thane) .. Appellant
(Org.Accd. No.15)

Vs.

The State of Maharashtra
Through DCB, CID, Police HQ,
Crawford Market, Mumbai. .. Respondent
(Org. Complainant)

Mr.  Akhil Sibbal i/by Mr. Mubin Solkar for appellant.
Mrs. Aruna Pai, Addl. P.P. for respondent.

CORAM: B. H. MARLAPALLE &
SMT. V.K. TAHILRAMANI, JJ.

Reserved on : February 11, 2010.

Pronounced on : February 22, 2010.

JUDGMENT (Per B. H. Marlapalle,J.):

Heard the learned counsel for the appellant.

Admit.

2

2. Mrs. Pai, the learned Addl. P.P. waives service for the

respondent – State of Maharashtra.

2A. Print dispensed with as the private paper book copies have

been circulated. Appeal is heard finally.

3. The appellant in this appeal, filed in the second round under

Section 34 of the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (the POTA for short)

by accused no.15 in POTA Special Case No. 2 of 2003, prays for being

released on bail.

4. The appellant is a resident of village Borivali, Post – Padgha,

Taluka – Bhiwandi, District – Thane and he was initially shown wanted in

C.R. No. 25 of 2003 registered with the Padgha Police Station on

27/3/2003 for the offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 149, 225,

341, 353 and 355 of I.P.C. This complaint pertains to the alleged incident

of obstruction put up by the villagers of Borivali to the Padgha police and

the police officials of DCB – CID, Mumbai on 27/3/2003, when a heavy

police contingent of Mumbai Crime Branch led by Sr. P.I. Pradeep Sharma

and Daya Nayak had gone to village Borivali – Padgha for arresting

3

accused no.1 – Saquib Nachan in connection with the offence of Mulund

Bomb blast being DCB-CID C.R. No. 21 of 2003. As per the appellant, as

the police were making rounds to his house, he surrendered to the Padgha

police on 5/5/2003 and on the same day he was handed over to the officers

of the Mumbai Crime Branch. His marriage was scheduled on 24/5/2003

and it could not be performed as he was illegally detained by the officials

of DCB – CID from 5/5/2003 to 9/6/2003, on which day he was shown to

be arrested and was produced before the Special Court on 10/6/2003 as

accused no.15 in DCB-CID C.R. No. 21 of 2003. A combined charge-sheet

came to be filed in respect of three Bomb blasts i.e. (a) Mumbai Central –

taken place on 6/12/2003, (b) Vile-Parle – taken place on 27/1/2003 and (c)

Mulund – taken place on 13/3/2003. He applied for being released on bail

in Bail Application No. 14 of 2004 before the Special Court and the same

was rejected on 18/1/2005. He approached this court in Criminal Appeal

No. 298 of 2005 and it was dismissed on 24/2/2006 by the Division Bench.

He claims that in response to his application made under the Right to

Information Act on 17/4/2007, he received some additional information/

material on 23/5/2007 and based on that he preferred a fresh bail

application registered as Bail Application No. 5 of 2007 before the Special

Court on 5/6/2007. While the said application was pending before the

4

Special Court, he filed Criminal Writ Petition No. 2188 of 2007, in which

an order came to be passed on 10/3/2008, directing the learned Principal

Sessions Judge for Greater Mumbai to conduct a judicial inquiry and

submit report to this court on the allegations of his illegal detention from

5/5/2003 to 9/6/2003. The Principal Sessions Judge conducted the inquiry

and submitted his report on 8/7/2008 and a copy of the same was also

placed before the Special Court in the pending bail application. However,

the Special Court rejected the second Bail Application, as well, on 9 [th] /10 [th ]

September, 2008 and hence this appeal in the second round for being

released on bail.

5. The appellant has also pointed out that against the order dated

24/2/2006, dismissing Criminal Appeal No. 298 of 2005, he has filed SLP

(Cri) No. 2360 of 2006 and the same is pending before the Apex Court. It

is the case of the appellant that notwithstanding the pendency of the said

SLP, his fresh plea for bail is required to be considered on account of the

changed circumstances and as per him the learned Special Judge failed to

consider his plea of changed circumstances and while passing the

impugned order dated 9 [th] /10 [th] September, 2008, the Special Court was

overwhelmed by the observations made by this court in its earlier order

5

dated 24/2/2006.

It has been pointed out that the trial in POTA Special Case

No. 2 of 2003 has been stayed by the Supreme Court as per the order dated

18/10/2005 and the said order continues as of now. As many as three

accused i.e. accused no. 2 – Atif Nasir Mulla, accused no.4 – Gulam Akbar

Khotal and accused no. 10 - Arif Hussain Sabir Hussain Shaik @ Arif

Panwale have been released on bail. As per the enquiry report dated

8/7/2008 submitted by the Principal Sessions Judge, the appellant was in

illegal detention from 5/5/2003 to 9/6/2003 and he was picked up as a

witness but when he refused to give statements against the main accused –

Nachan, he was shown as an accused and for doing so he was shown to

have been arrested on 9/6/2003. Our attention has been drawn to the

observations made in the inquiry report, as under:

“... As only bailable offence was registered in Padgha

police station, his further detention in police custody

could not have been authorised by Magistrate. Adnan

was not produced before the Magistrate from 5/5/2003

till 9/6/2003 and so, in view of Sections 56, 57 and 167

6

of Cr.P.C. the detention of Adnan during this period was

illegal, unauthorized. The arrest was also not made as

provided by Sections 46 to 53 and 58 of Cr.P.C. The

procedure was not followed by DCB CID obviously

with intention to avoid creating of the record and there is

clear probability that investigating agency did not want

to make Adnan an accused but it wanted to make him a

witness.”

Mr. Sibbal also submitted that even the statements recorded

under Sections 161 and 164 of Cr.P.C. of some witnesses as well as co

accused did not take the prosecution case any further to show any prima

facie evidence so as to result in the conviction of the appellant for the

offences punishable either under Sections 3, 4, 5, 20, 21(1)(4) of the

POTA. He also relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in the case

of State (NCT of Delhi) vs. Navjot Sandhu **[(2005) 11 SCC 600],** Ram

Govind Upadhyay vs. Sudarshan Singh **[(2002) 3 SCC 598]**, Dagdu vs.

State of Maharashtra **[(1977) 3 SCC 68]**, Surinder Singh vs. State of

Punjab **[(2005) 7 SCC 387]**, Babba alias Shankar Raghuman Rohida vs.

State of Maharashtra **[(2005) 11 SCC 569]** and Shaheen Welfare

7

Association vs. Union of India **[(1996) 2 SCC 616]** in support of his fresh

plea for bail.

6. Mrs. Pai, the learned Addl. P.P., on the other hand, opposed the

appeal. She pointed out that the SLP filed by the appellant against the

earlier order dated 24/2/2006 is still pending and the appellant failed to

make out any case of changed circumstances to entertain this second bail

application. As per Mrs. Pai, the observations made by this court in the

earlier order dated 24/2/2006 regarding parity for being released, as some

other accused have been granted bail, the law laid down in Navjot Sandhu’s

case etc. cannot be reconsidered in this fresh application for bail as the

challenge to the said observations is under consideration in the pending

SLP. She also submitted that in SLP (Cri) No. 5170-5172 of 2005, leave to

appeal has been granted by the Supreme Court on 29/2/2008 further to the

stay granted to the trial of POTA Special Case No. 2 of 2003 on 18/10/2005

and the State Government has already filed an application for expeditious

hearing of the said appeal. As per Mrs. Pai, as one of the accused has

approached the Supreme Court and obtained stay to the trial of the POTA

Special Case, the State Government cannot be blamed for the delay caused

in commencing the trial. The inquiry report submitted by the Principal

8

Sessions Judge cannot be relied upon in this appeal as the same is a subject

matter for scrutiny in Criminal Writ Petition No. 2188 of 2007, which is

pending.  The learned Addl. P.P. further submitted that the two

circumstances against the appellant are prima facie supported by the

prosecution case, namely, (a) he had transported and delivered one AK 47

Rifle to the main accused and (b) he was instrumental as a driver of the

Jeep which transported some of the witnesses to the training camp at

Mahuli Hills.  The impugned order passed by the Special Court does not

suffer from any errors in law and, therefore, no interference is called for in

the same, so as to release the appellant on bail. She pointed out that the

order dated 4/5/2009 passed by the Special Court releasing accused no. 4

on bail is a subject matter of challenge before this court in Criminal Appeal

(Stamp) No. 936 of 2009 for cancellation of the bail and some other co

accused have filed appeals for bail which are pending before this court, as

indicated below:

i) Cri.Appeal No. 305/09 - Saquib Nachan (Accd.No.1)

ii) Cri. Appeal No. 389/09 - Haroon Lohar (Accd.No.13)

iii) Cri. Appeal No. 608/09 – Farhaan Khot (Accd. No.6)

iv) Cri. Appeal No. 609/09 – Rashid Ansari (Accd. No.14)

9

v) Cri. Appeal No.612/09–Noor Mohd. Ansari (Accd.No.7)

vi) Cri.Appeal No.679/09-Wahid Jabbar Ansari(Accd.No.8)

vii) Cri.Appeal No. 624/09-Hasib Zuber Mulla (Accd. No.3)

The learned APP also stated that during the pendency of this

appeal, the appellant had moved for the third time in Criminal Application

No. 89 of 2009 for bail before the Special Court on the ground of parity

with accused no.4 and the same has not been pointed out either in the

appeal memo or during the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for

the appellant and the said application has been allowed to be withdrawn on

8/2/2010 by imposing costs of Rs.1000/-.

7. As noted earlier, this appeal arises from the order rejecting the

plea for bail in the second round and, therefore, we are required to

consider, whether the appellant has made out a case to point out that the

impugned order is required to be set aside and that he is required to be

released on bail by considering the changed circumstances, if any. Our

earlier order dated 24/2/2006 is already under challenge in the pending SLP

filed by the appellant and, therefore, the appeal is required to be considered

independent of the reasons set out in the said order and it cannot be held

10

that this appeal is required to be dismissed only because the appellant’s

plea for being released on bail is a subject matter for consideration before

the Apex Court. So far as the third application filed by the appellant before

the Special Court is concerned, it has been submitted by the learned

counsel for the appellant that the application was sent directly from the Jail

to the court and it was not within the knowledge of Shri Solkar, the learned

Advocate appearing for the appellant.

8. In any case, the application has been allowed to be withdrawn

on 8/2/2010 by the Special Court and as of now it is not pending.  The

letter dated 26/11/2009 received by the Assistant Commissioner of Police,

DCB CID, Mumbai from the Additional Government Advocate before the

Supreme Court, Government of Maharashtra, states that though a detailed

counter affidavit of API Shri Manojkumar R. Mhatre dated 11/8/2006 was

filed long time back before the Supreme Court, the appeal was admitted by

the Supreme Court on 29/2/2008 and the appellant therein had submitted

Cri. Misc. Petition No. 19824-19827 of 2008 praying for early date of

hearing. The said application was allowed on 9/1/2009 by directing Cri.

Appeal No. 419-421 of 2008 to be listed for final hearing on 28/1/2009.

Nonetheless, the appeal could not reach for final hearing and on

11

24/11/2009 the State Government has filed a Cri. Misc. Petition for

vacation of interim stay.  The further progress in criminal appeal, in which

the trial of the Spl. POTA Case No.2 of 2003 has been stayed is not known.

Mrs. Pai also raised an additional ground contending that the statement

made by the co-accused (accused no.7) goes to show that in April 2002 the

present appellant had undergone training of arms and ammunition and

preparation of crude bombs imparted by accused no.7. She also relied upon

some literature like `Al Qaida Manual’ found in the panchanama dated

19/4/2003 drawn at medical shop owned by accused no.1 and alleged that

the accused are propagating for a delayed trial.

9. Section 49 (6) of the POTA states that notwithstanding

anything contained in the Criminal Procedure Code, no person accused of

an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail

or on his own bond unless the Court gives the Public Prosecutor an

opportunity of being heard. As per Section 49(7) of the POTA, where the

Public Prosecutor opposes the application of the accused to release on bail,

no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made

thereunder shall be released on bail until the Court is satisfied that there are

grounds for believing that he is not guilty of committing such offence. The

12

proviso below the said Section is important for our considerations and it

reads as under:

“Provided that after the expiry of a period of one year from the

date of detention of the accused for an offence under this Act,

the provisions of sub-section (6) of this section shall not

apply.”

(the word “not” is added by the Supreme Court)

The proviso, therefore, makes it clear that if the application for

bail is submitted after a period of one year of detention, the provisions of

Section 49(6) of the POTA shall not apply and the application will have to

be considered on the parameters of Section 439 of Cr.P.C. and this position

in law is well settled. At the same time, in the case of Navjot Sandhu

(Supra), the Supreme Court held that the confession made by an accused

before a police officer shall be admissible against the maker of the

confession in the course of his trial, it may be a joint trial along with some

other accused; but, the language of Section 32(1) of the POTA cannot be

stretched to bring the confession of the co-accused within the fold of

admissibility. By applying this settled legal principle, the confession of the

co-accused cannot be read against the present appellant while considering

13

his plea for bail in this appeal.

10. In the case of Gokul Bhagaji Patil vs. State of Maharashtra

**[(2007) 2 SCC 475]**, the Supreme Court was considering the plea for being

released on bail of an accused charged under the Maharashtra Control of

Organized Crime Act, 1999 (MCOCA). It would be useful to reproduce

the following observations in para 10, 13 and 14 of the said Judgment:

“10. Since the provisions of MCOCA have been invoked in

the present case, in addition to the basic considerations,

namely, the nature and seriousness of the offence; the

character of the evidence; reasonable apprehension of witness

being tampered with and reasonable possibility of the presence

of the accused not being secured at the trial, etc.; which

normally weigh with the courts for granting bail in non

bailable offences, the limitations imposed in sub-section (4) of

Section 21 of MCOCA need to be kept in view while deciding

whether or not the appellant is entitled to bail.

13. It would not be appropriate at this juncture to go into

14

detailed examination of the alleged crime in order to arrive at

a positive findings as to whether or not the appellant has

committed offences under Section 3(2) or 24 of MCOCA.

What is required to be considered is whether in the light of the

circumstances, enumerated above; (i) there is a reasonable

ground to believe that the appellant is not guilty of the two

offences he has been charged with under MCOCA, and (ii)

that he is not likely to commit an offence under MCOCA

while on bail.

14. We have considered the matter in the light of the

inferences drawn by the High Court from the material on

record and the role attributed to the appellant. After hearing

learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the

purported acts of omission and commission on the part of the

appellant may not _per se_ bring his case within the ambit of

Section 3(2) of MCOCA. Nevertheless, the aforementioned

circumstances do tend to indicate that as a public servant he

had failed to take lawful measures under MCOCA, attracting

the provisions of Section 24 of MCOCA. Having reached this

15

conclusion and bearing in mind the fact that the appellant has

been in judicial custody for over three years, the maximum

period of sentence contemplated under Section 24 of

MCOCA, we are of the view that the appellant deserves to be

released on bail.”

In the case of Babba (Supra), the accused was in jail since

16/7/1992 and bail was refused. There was no regular TADA Court at Mumbai

and TADA case’s trial was likely to take some time to commence and,

therefore, a fresh bail application was filed. The Supreme Court was pleased to

grant bail on certain stringent conditions.

In the case of State of U.P. vs. Amarmani Tripathi [(2005) 8 SCC

21], the Supreme Court held that while considering the application for bail what

is required to be looked into is, (i) whether there is any prima facie or

reasonable ground to believe that the accused had committed the offence; (ii)

nature and gravity of the charge, (iii) severity of the punishment in the event of

conviction; (iv) danger of accused absconding or fleeing if released on bail; (v)

character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the accused; (vi) liklihood

16

of the offence bearing repeated; (vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses

being tampered with; and (viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by

grant of bail. It is also equally well settled that when an application for bail is

being considered, the period in jail, delay in commencing the trial and the right

to life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution are also equally

important factors which ought to be considered.  As a civilized country valuing

the dignity of the individual, the founding fathers decided that when it came to

depriving a person of his life or putting his person under restraint by

imprisonment, justice required that the safeguards provided by Articles 20, 21

and 22 should be available to citizen and non-citizen alike before anyone is held

guilty of committing a crime, and before he is sentenced to death or

imprisonment. (Seervai on “Constitutional Law of India”)

11. So far as the prima facie evidence relied upon by the learned APP

on the first issue, namely, that the appellant was found to have transported and

delivered one AK 47 Rifle to village Borivali Padgha, District Thane to accused

no.1 is concerned, our attention has been invited by the learned counsel for the

appellant to the findings recorded on this issue by the Special Court in its order

dated 21/3/2009 passed in Application at Exh.54, which read as under:

17

“7. I have gone through the statements of the witnesses

appearing on page No. 525 and 529 of Volume No.V of the

chargesheet and on careful perusal of the statements of the

witnesses recorded under section 164 of Cr.P.C., I find that the

witnesses referred above did not state that applicant Adnan

transported AK-47 rifles from Malegaon to village Borivli, Padgha,

Dist. Thane along with co-accused Noor Mohd. Ansari. It is

therefore clear that above two witnesses do not support the

allegation referred above.

12. Three of the co-accused have been released on bail. The appellant

has been under arrest for about 7 years by now. The enquiry conducted by the

Principal Sessions Judge indicates that the appellant was initially picked up as a

witness and when he refused to give statement against the main accused, who is

his brother-in-law, he was shown as an accused and for doing so he was shown

to have been arrested on 9/6/2006. We have considered the statements recorded

under Sections 161 and 164 of Cr.P.C. for considering the gravity of the two

circumstances relied upon by the learned Addl. P.P., namely, (i) that the

appellant had transported and delivered on AK 47 gun to the main accused and

(ii) he was instrumental as a driver of the jeep which transported some of the

18

witnesses to the training camp at Mahuli Hills. As far as the confessional

statements of accused no.7 are concerned, this court in the earlier order dated

24/2/2006 noted that the learned APP did not dispute the proposition that the

confessions recorded under Section 32 of the POTA are not admissible as

against co-accused as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Navjot

Sandhu (Supra). In the case of Navjot Sandhu (Supra) the Supreme Court also

held that the theory of agency cannot be extended to find all the conspirators

guilty of the actual offences committed in execution of the common design

even if such offences were ultimately committed by some of them, without the

participation of others and those who committed the offences pursuant to the

conspiracy by indulging in various overt acts will be individually liable for

those offences in addition to being liable for criminal conspiracy, but the non

participant conspirators cannot be found guilty of the offence or offences

committed by the other conspirators. It is also well settled that accomplice

evidence is of a tainted character and as such is a weak evidence, even as and

when the trial of the pending POTA case commences. Inordinate delay in a trial

is one of the relevant factors for grant of bail considering the legal position that

the speedy trial is a facet of the fundamental rights under Article 21 of the

Constitution. It is not known, with certainty as of now, as to when the trial in

POTA Special Case No. 2 of 2003 would commence and on the face of this

19

uncertainty, the incarceration of the appellant in jail for close to seven years

cannot be allowed to continue. Even the allegation made by the prosecution

that the appellant had participated in the training is based on the confession

statement of accused no.7 and, therefore, it cannot be treated as a circumstance

against him, as of now, by following the decision in Navjot Sandhu’s case.

When the learned Special Public Prosecutor filed his reply on 16/8/2007 before

the Special Court to oppose the Bail Application No. 5 of 2007, it was

specifically stated that the evidence against the applicant as disclosed in the

charge-sheet was as under:

“(a) That he transported AK-47 rifle from Malegaon to village

Borivali Padgha, District Thane along with co-accused Noor

Mohd. Ansari (Accsued No.7). On this point there are statements

of witnesses recorded under section 164 of the Cr.P.C.

(b) The present appellant had transported Muslim youths to

Mahuli Hills for undergoing the illegal training of fire arms i.e.

AK-47 rifles and for preparing and exploding bombs. On this

there are witnesses who have identified him as the driver of vehicle

in which the Muslim youths as stated above were transported.

20

Similarly there are statements under 161 and 164 of the Cr.P.C.

which contain the said acts of the appellant.”

This reply filed before the Special Court does not any where allege

that the appellant himself has undergone the training of arms and ammunition

and preparation of crude bombs imparted by accused no.7 and this ground

appears to have been raised for the first time while opposing this appeal and

that  too on the basis of the confession statements made by accused no.7. The

substance of these allegations, therefore, cannot be held against the appellant

while considering his plea for bail. So far as the printed literature, which was

relied upon by the learned APP, is concerned, the same may help the

prosecution in support of its application before the Supreme Court for early

disposal of the pending Criminal Appeal.

13. We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that having regard to

the totality of the circumstances as they emerged after the earlier bail plea was

rejected on 24/2/2006, the appellant has been wrongly denied bail by the trial

court. The trial court failed to consider that there were changed circumstances

and it has mainly relied upon the observations made by this court in the earlier

order dated 24/2/2006. We do not approve of the Special Court’s refusal to

21

consider the enquiry report submitted by the Principal Sessions Judge,

notwithstanding the fact that the said report is a subject matter of scrutiny in the

pending writ petition.   The incidents described in the charge-sheet make out a

large operation conspired and hatched by the main accused i.e. accused no.1.

The appellant is the brother-in-law of accused no.1 and the evidence, prima

facie, indicates that he was associated in one or two operations of the entire

large operation and this evidence cannot be, as of now, read as to hold that

there is sufficient evidence against the appellant to record a conviction against

him on the basis that his engagement, agreement, association and/or

involvement was in the entire operation.

14. We must also note that this is not a case where the trial has

commenced and is getting delayed for some reasons or the other. The reliance

of Mrs. Pai on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Gobarbhai

Naranbhai Singala vs. State of Gujarat and ors. **[2008 Cri.L.J. 1618]** is,

therefore, misplaced.   The reasoning set out by the Special Court in rejecting

the application for bail is unsustainable and in any case after the said order was

passed the period of one year and five months has elapsed, which by itself is an

additional circumstance in favour of the appellant.

22

15. Hence, this appeal succeeds and the same is hereby allowed. The

impugned order is hereby quashed and set aside. The appellant – Adnan Bilal

Mulla is directed to be released on bail, if not required in any other case, on

furnishing the bail of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One lakh only) and two solvent

local sureties in the like amount. In addition, the appellant shall report to the

Padgha Police Station every day between 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. till the trial in Spl.

POTA Case No. 2 of 2003 commences and after commencement of the trial, he

shall report to the said police station once in a week. In case he holds a

passport, he shall surrender the same to the prosecuting agency i.e. DCB CID,

Mumbai forthwith and he shall not move out of the area within the jurisdiction

of Padgha Police Station without informing the same to the Senior P.I. of the

said police station. Bail Application No. 5 of 2007 stands allowed accordingly.

(SMT. V.K. TAHILRAMANI,J.)          (B. H. MARLAPALLE,J.)

Mrs. Pai, the learned APP, submitted an oral application

praying for stay to the operation of this order for a period of eight weeks.

This has been opposed by Mr. Solkar.

23

We stay the operation of this order for a period of four weeks

from today.

(SMT.V.K. TAHILRAMANI,J.) (B.H. MARLAPALLE,J.)
