NISHA
SANDEEP
CHITNIS

Digitally signed by
NISHA SANDEEP
CHITNIS
Date: 2023.09.07
11:45:17 +0530

2-ba.1774.2022.doc

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY

CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CRIMINAL BAIL APPLICATION NO.1774 OF 2022

Akshay Eknath Kokate ...Applicant
Versus
State of Maharashtra ...Respondent

Mr. Shaikh Abdul Kalam a/w Ms. Sana Shaikh, for the Applicant.

Ms. P. P. Shinde,  A.P.P for the Respondent – State.

PSI – Prakash Shirdhankar, Andheri Police Station, Mumbai, is present.

CORAM :  REVATI MOHITE DERE, J.

DATE   :  5 [th] SEPTEMBER 2023

P.C. :

1. Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2. This is the second bail application preferred by the

applicant, seeking his enlargement on bail in connection with C.R.

No. 564 of 2017 registered with the Andheri Police Station, Mumbai,

for the alleged offences punishable under Sections 392 r/w 34 of the

Indian Penal Code. The first bail application of the applicant was

withdrawn by the learned counsel for the applicant, as the Court was

N. S. Chitnis 1/6

2-ba.1774.2022.doc

not inclined to enlarge the applicant on bail. The said application was

accordingly dismissed as withdrawn. The same is recorded in the

order dated 25 [th] July 2019, passed in Criminal Bail Application

No.2508 of 2019.

3. Perused the papers. The incident is alleged to have taken

place on 30 [th] October 2017 at about 5:45 p.m. on the Western

Express Highway, Andheri Bridge, Andheri (East), Mumbai. It is

alleged that the complainant alongwith his employee - Sandeep were

proceeding on the said highway, after collecting cash amount of Rs.14

lakhs odd. It is alleged that the applicant alongwith other co-accused

committed robbery of the said amount and in the process assaulted the

complainant and one another and ran away. Pursuant thereto, the

aforesaid C.R was registered as against the applicant and others. It

appears that in the Test Identification Parade, the applicant was

identified by the complainant. It is the prosecution case that from the

amount received by the applicant, he purchased a motorcycle on 10 [th]

November 2017. The applicant is in custody since November 2017,

N. S. Chitnis 2/6

2-ba.1774.2022.doc

with no prospect of the trial commencing. Although, charge is framed

in the said case, not a single witness has been examined by the

prosecution, till date.

4. The applicant has filed an affidavit-cum-undertaking dated

26 [th] August 2023 duly affirmed before the Jailor, Mumbai Central

Prison. In the said affidavit-cum-undertaking, the applicant has stated

that if released on bail, he will attend the trial Court on all the dates of

hearing and will co-operate in the expeditious disposal of the trial,

which is pending before the Dindoshi Sessions Court. The applicant

has also undertaken to attend the concerned police station as and

when directed by this Court and of  not breaching any of the

conditions that may be imposed by this Court.

5. Considering the aforesaid, the application is allowed and

the applicant is enlarged on bail, on the following terms and

conditions:

N. S. Chitnis 3/6

2-ba.1774.2022.doc

ORDER

i) The applicant be enlarged on bail, on executing PR

Bond in the sum of Rs. 25,000/- with one or two sureties

in the like amount;

(ii) The applicant shall attend the concerned Police

Station on the first Saturday of every month from 10:00

a.m. to 1:00 p.m. till the conclusion of the trial, unless the

date of the Trial Court falls on Saturday;

(iii) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence or

attempt to influence or contact the complainant, witnesses

or any person concrned with the case;

(iv) The applicant shall inform his latest place of

residence and mobile contact number immediately after

being released and/or change of residence or mobile details,

if any, from time to fime to the Court seized of the matter

N. S. Chitnis 4/6

2-ba.1774.2022.doc

and to the Investigating Officer of the concerned Police

Station;

(v) The applicant to cooperate with the conduct of the

trial and attend  the trial Court on all dates, unless

exempted;

(vi) The applicant shall file an undertaking with regard to

clauses (ii) to (v) in the trial Court, within two weeks of his

release;

(vii) If there is a breach of any of the aforesaid conditions,

the prosecution shall be at liberty to seek cancellation of

the applicant’s bail.

6. The application is allowed in the aforesaid terms and is

accordingly disposed of.

N. S. Chitnis 5/6

2-ba.1774.2022.doc

7. It is made clear that the observations made herein are

prima facie, and the trial Court shall decide the case on its own meris,

in accordance with law, uninfluenced by the observations made in this

order.

8. All concerned to act on the authenticated copy of this

order.

REVATI MOHITE DERE, J.

N. S. Chitnis 6/6
